Convert rewriting and proof-mode chapters to prodn (#13470)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/proofs/writing-proofs/proof-mode.rst

.. _proofhandling:

----------
Proof mode
----------

:gdef:`Proof mode <proof mode>` is used to prove theorems.
Coq enters proof mode when you begin a proof,
such as with the :cmd:`Theorem` command.  It exits proof mode when
you complete a proof, such as with the :cmd:`Qed` command.  Tactics,
which are available only in proof mode, incrementally transform incomplete
proofs to eventually generate a complete proof.

When you run Coq interactively, such as through CoqIDE, Proof General or

> coqtop, Coq shows the current proof state--the incomplete proof--as you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
coqtop, Coq shows the current proof state—the incomplete proof—as you
```

Author: Ah, a subtle point.  The typewritten form of an "em dash" is `--`, while a hyphen is `-`.  The em dash is used in this case to introduce parenthetical information, while the hyphen is used to form compound words.  "em" as in the width of the letter "m".  In Unicode the en dash is  `—`.

https://www.grammarly.com/blog/hyphens-and-dashes/#:~:text=What's%20the%20Difference%20Between%20Dashes%20and%20Hyphens%3F&text=A%20hyphen%20(%2D)%20is%20a,a%20range%20or%20a%20pause.

I'll use parentheses instead.

Reviewer: What I put here was precisely the unicode character for em dash.

Author: Doh!  Right you are.  Easy to confuse the two.

enter tactics.  This information isn't shown when you run Coq in batch
mode with `coqc`.

Proof State
-----------

.. todo PR: my example is pretty bad--can you suggest a better one?

>    Also need to position/integrate this better

Author: OK, good enough then.

> The :gdef:`proof state`, also referred to as the :gdef:`proof context`, consists of one

Reviewer: As I just commented elsewhere, I would distinguish these two notions.

Author: I suggested above that we not use "proof context" in the doc.

Reviewer: Fine with me.

or more unproven goals.
Each goal has a :gdef:`conclusion` (the statement that is to be proven)
and may have zero or more named facts that can be used in proving the

> conclusion (in addition to definitions, proven theorems, etc.).

Reviewer: This is precisely what I (and others I think) call the "proof context". It comes in addition to the "global context".

Author: How often do we need to refer to "proof context" as something different from "proof state" and "goal context"?  "local context" is used 58 times while "global context" is used 5 times in the doc.  The latter probably should be used more often.

Reviewer: OK then "global environment" is actually more common. Does it mean that we should uniformize toward "global environment" and "local context"?

Author: I'm thinking "global context" and "local context" but I'm open to suggestions.

The term ":gdef:`goal`" may refer to an entire goal or to the conclusion
of a goal, depending on the context.

The facts appear above a line and the conclusion appears below that line.

> They are both types.  Facts can be :gdef:`hypotheses <hypothesis>`

Reviewer: The conclusion is a type, no doubt. But the "facts" (to reuse your terminology) also have a name, and may have a body (in the case of local definitions). So I would not say they *are* types. I would say they are names associated to a type and an optional body.

Author: How's this?  FWIW I used "facts" precisely because it's not a defined term, nor used elsewhere.  It could be "items" or something else as well.

The conclusion appears below a line and the facts appear above the line.
The conclusion is a type and each fact has an associated type.
Facts can be :gdef:`hypotheses <hypothesis>`
(which are propositions), variables or local definitions.
The name of the fact appears first.  The type is shown after the colon.  Local
definitions are shown in the form `n := 0 : nat`, for example, in which `nat` is the
type of `0`.

(which are propositions), variables or local definitions.
The name of the fact appears first.  The type is shown after the colon.  Local
definitions are shown in the form `n := 0 : nat`.

The proof state when you begin proving a theorem shows
the statement of the theorem below the line and no hypotheses above the

> line:

Reviewer: Also known as an empty proof context.

Author: Sure.  But probably not worth introducing the term unless we use it more than once.

.. coqtop:: none

   Parameter P: nat -> Prop.

.. coqtop:: out

   Goal forall n m: nat, n > m -> P 1 /\ P 2.

After applying the :tacn:`intros` :term:`tactic`, we see hypotheses above the line.
The names of variables (`n` and `m`) and hypotheses (`H`) appear before a colon, followed by
the type they represent.

.. coqtop:: all

   intros.

> Some tactics, such as :tacn:`split`, create new goals.

Reviewer: If we want to define what a "subgoal" is, I would define it around here as a "goal generated by a tactic".

Author: "Some tactics, such as :tacn:`split`, create new goals, which may
be referred to as :gdef:`subgoals <subgoal>` in descriptions for clarity."

Goals are numbered from 1 to N at each step of the proof to permit applying a
tactic to specific goals.

.. coqtop:: all

   split.

> "Variables" may refer specifically to items for which "type of (type of *fact*)"

Reviewer: I would find "the type of their type" clearer to read.

is `Set` or `Type`, and "hypotheses" to :term:`propositions <proposition>`,
which are items for which "type of (type of
*fact*)" is `Prop` or `SProp`, but these terms are also used interchangeably.

> .. coqtop:: all
> 
>    let t_n := type of n in idtac "type of n:" t_n;
>    let tt_n := type of t_n in idtac "type of (type of n):" tt_n.
>    let t_H := type of H in idtac "type of H:" t_H;
>    let tt_H := type of t_H in idtac "type of (type of H):" tt_H.

Reviewer: Let's save the reader from seeing such Ltac code so early by only displaying the output. Also, another suggestion that eases the reading IMHO:

```suggestion
.. coqtop:: out

   let t_n := type of n in idtac "type of n:" t_n;
   let tt_n := type of t_n in idtac "type of" t_n ":" tt_n.
   let t_H := type of H in idtac "type of H:" t_H;
   let tt_H := type of t_H in idtac "type of" t_H ":" tt_H.
```

Author: I considered doing it both ways.  Leaving out the code may leave a question unanswered.  I suppose the code could be in a footnote.  I made it "out" only.

A proof script, consisting of the tactics that are applied to prove a
theorem, is often informally referred to as a "proof".
The real proof, whether complete or incomplete, is a term, the :gdef:`proof term`,
which users may occasionally want to examine.  (This is based on the
*Curry-Howard isomorphism* :cite:`How80,Bar81,Gir89,H89`, which is

> a correspondence between between proofs and terms of λ-calculus.)

Reviewer: ...and propositions and types. It's probably important to say this as well given that the isomorphism is also sometimes called the "propositions-as-types correspondence".

The :cmd:`Show Proof` command displays the incomplete proof term
before you've completed the proof.  For example:

.. coqtop:: all

   Show Proof.

The incomplete parts, the goals, are represented by existential variables

> with names that begin with `?Goal`.  In the :cmd:`Show Existentials` command,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with names that begin with `?Goal`.  In the :cmd:`Show Existentials` command output,
```

the colon, as for this theorem from Coq's standard library:

.. coqtop:: all

   Print proj1.

.. _proof-editing-mode:

Entering and exiting proof mode
-------------------------------

Coq enters *proof mode* when you begin a proof through
commands such as :cmd:`Theorem` or :cmd:`Goal`.  Coq user interfaces
usually have a way to indicate that you're in proof mode.
For example, CoqIDE shows the name of the theorem being proved at the
bottom left of the window.  Coqtop changes its input prompt to
include the name of the theorem being proven.

.. todo PR: the last 3 sentences above seem pretty unimportant
   don't you think the user will figure this out on their own?

Tactics are only available only in proof mode, while commands
are always available.  By convention, tactics begin with lowercase letters
while commands begin with uppercase letters.

.. todo PR: is the following really true?  I see that Focus is accepted outside a proof:

   In Coq’s proof mode ... user has access to specialized
   commands dealing with proof development pragmas documented in this
   section.

.. todo PR: following seems to conflate the proof context with section-level info, e.g.

>    Parameter, ... are part of the section  Is this truly the "local context"?

Author: Ah, clear as mud.  Replacing `Qed` with the following, I don't know what to make of the output.

It's 3 levels, right? "local context" means things that are not in the proof state, i.e. section-scoped items?  The scope of a section can't go beyond a single file?  `Require Import` doesn't load sections although sections can be used to prevent exporting items?  Is that right?

I think we need a paragraph that defines these scopes.  Not sure if it should be here, near the `local` attribute or near the `Section` command.

```
Save bar.
Print bar.

bar = p
     : P
```

>    Parameter, ... are part of the section  Is this truly the "local context"?

Author: BTW, I see we use the term "environment" 109 times.  That's usually the same as the "global context", right?  Should we replace those uses with "global context"?

>    Parameter, ... are part of the section  Is this truly the "local context"?

Reviewer: >It's 3 levels, right?

Correct. I would call these levels "global context", "section context" and "proof context". "local context" encompasses the latter two.

>The scope of a section can't go beyond a single file?

Correct but probably irrelevant to the current discussion.

>sections can be used to prevent exporting items?

Some stuff is not exported outside sections, but it's more of an implementation limitation than their actual use case. The use case of sections is to not repeat some variables and hypotheses that you would like to use in several lemmas or definitions. Therefore, it is expected that when you define a section variable or hypothesis it will be used almost the same as when you define those in your lemma statement.

>    Parameter, ... are part of the section  Is this truly the "local context"?

Reviewer: > BTW, I see we use the term "environment" 109 times. That's usually the same as the "global context", right? Should we replace those uses with "global context"?

I see many "local environment" and "global environment". Yes, it means the same as "local context" and "global context". Sometimes, "environment" is use unqualified to designate the union of the two. There are also a lot of uses of "environment variable" that have nothing to do with this.

>    Parameter, ... are part of the section  Is this truly the "local context"?

Author: I wasn't so sure about changing some of the uses of "environment" to "global context", particularly in, say, the `cic` chapter.  I made those changes in a separate commit.  Let me know what you think.  If they need to be handled on a case by case basis, perhaps you could push a commit that uses the term in the right places?

I don't think "section context" is needed.  I probably skipped adjusting some of the tactics and SSR chapters.  WDYT?

>    Parameter, ... are part of the section  Is this truly the "local context"?

Reviewer: Regarding uniformizing the terminology to one of "global environment" or "global context", the two should really mean the same thing, so if we want to commit to this uniformization, there is no strict reason to do it everywhere but in the CIC (typing rules) chapter. Now, the fact that [this chapter clearly defines both "local context" and "global environment"](https://coq.github.io/doc/master/refman/language/cic.html#id6) (clearly refusing to use a symmetric terminology) makes me think that we should accept this and use those terms everywhere.

>    Parameter, ... are part of the section  Is this truly the "local context"?

Reviewer: BTW, these paragraphs also use interesting terminology: "declaration" for what you called "fact" (can be local or global) and they separate these declarations into "assumptions" on the one hand and "definitions" on the other hand. They use the term "variables" to designate all the names (be it for assumptions and definitions) and do not make a special case for hypotheses (although IMHO it's still worth doing to explain the difference in the auto-generated names).

>    Parameter, ... are part of the section  Is this truly the "local context"?

Author: > if we want to commit to this uniformization, there is no strict reason to do it everywhere but in the CIC (typing rules) chapter.

I wasn't sure whether it was being used in a different sense, the CIC chapter being more math than software.  I thought I'd ask before changing them.  If there are published papers that use these terms, that would argue to keep these terms.  Also cic uses `E` for the environment (273 uses of "E" across all the doc, some/many not referring to the environment)--changing that might confusing to those who know the theory.  I see about 20 uses of "global environment", plus at least as many places where "environment" alone appears to have the same meaning.

> Now, the fact that this chapter clearly defines both "local context" and "global environment" (clearly refusing to use a symmetric terminology) makes me think that we should accept this and use those terms everywhere.

"local context" is only used 13 times in the cic chapter.  Does the definition therein "A *local context* is an ordered list of *local declarations* of names which we call *variables*." coincide with "goal context" or "local context" (section context + goal contexts) as I've defined them elsewhere?  Is the section context ordered?

I think the symmetry (actually consistency or the use of a common root term) is a plus; the local context and the global context hold things that are pretty similar.  Certainly I examine the wording that's already being used, but that's only one factor.  "global environment" seems wordy; there is no "local environment".  "environment" by itself is simpler.  If we think that changing "E" in the equations to "G" or "GC" is unwise I'd be OK with "environment" and "local context" with only a little reluctance.

BTW, the common term is "standardization" rather than "uniformization".

>    Parameter, ... are part of the section  Is this truly the "local context"?

Reviewer: > Does the definition therein "A _local context_ is an ordered list of _local declarations_ of names which we call _variables_." coincide with "goal context" or "local context" (section context + goal contexts) as I've defined them elsewhere? Is the section context ordered?

Yes to both.

I think we clearly need to involve other people in this discussion on terminology. For instance, I wouldn't be able to answer to the question about the standard terminology in published papers. Therefore, we should probably delay any further change beyond this PR (because it would otherwise slow this PR, that is almost ready, too much). The current state with just a few renamings is probably fine.

>    Parameter, ... are part of the section  Is this truly the "local context"?

Author: > Yes to both.

The first question is an either-or; "yes" is not such a helpful response.  Which is it?

>    Parameter, ... are part of the section  Is this truly the "local context"?

Reviewer: Sorry, I read too fast. It coincides with "local context".

   To each goal is associated a number of hypotheses called the *local context*
   of the goal. Initially, the local context contains the local variables and
   hypotheses of the current section (see Section :ref:`gallina-assumptions`) and
   the local variables and hypotheses of the theorem statement.

When the proof is completed, you can exit proof mode with commands such as
:cmd:`Qed`, :cmd:`Defined` and :cmd:`Save`.

.. cmd:: Goal @type

   Asserts an unnamed proposition.  This is intended for quick tests that
   a proposition is provable.  If the proof is eventually completed and

>    validated, you can assign a name with the :cmd:`Save` or :cmd:`Defined`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   validated, you can assign a name with the :cmd:`Save` or :cmd:`Defined`
```

   commands.  If no name is given, the name will be `Unnamed_thm` (or,
   if that name is already defined, a variant of that).

.. cmd:: Qed

>    This command is available in proof mode when the

Reviewer: What is lacking from this description and from the introduction is that calling `Qed` will trigger the kernel of Coq, which will verify that the proof term is of the expected type.

enter tactics.  This information isn't shown when you run Coq in batch
mode with `coqc`.

Proof State
-----------

The :gdef:`proof state` consists of one
or more unproven goals.
Each goal has a :gdef:`conclusion` (the statement that is to be proven)
and may have zero or more named facts that can be used in proving the
conclusion.  The proof may also use facts from the :term:`local context`
and the :term:`global context`, such as definitions and proven theorems.

The term ":gdef:`goal`" may refer to an entire goal or to the conclusion
of a goal, depending on the context.

The conclusion appears below a line and the facts appear above the line.
The conclusion is a type and each fact has an associated type.
Facts can be :term:`hypotheses <hypothesis>`
(which are propositions), variables or local definitions.
The name of the fact appears first.  The type is shown after the colon.  Local
definitions are shown in the form `n := 0 : nat`, for example, in which `nat` is the
type of `0`.

The set of facts can be called the :gdef:`goal context`.  The :gdef:`local context`
has local variables and hypotheses (see Section :ref:`gallina-assumptions`) defined in the current

> :ref:`section <section-mechanism>` and generally is taken to include the goal context(s).  The

Reviewer: I think you can skip the "generally" here. Local context should always mean section declarations + goal context.

Author: Got it. Also tweaked the wording to make clear that the local context is with respect to a single goal.

:gdef:`global context` has definitions and proven theorems that are of global scope and is

> generally taken to include the local context.

Reviewer: I'm surprised that you write that the "global context" includes the "local context". Do you have an example of use of this word that implies that? Since declarations from the global context and from the local context are usually handled quite differently, I think it would be natural that each of them is considered well separated from the other.

Author: A wrong guess on my part, now reversed.

.. _proofhandling:

----------
Proof mode
----------

:gdef:`Proof mode <proof mode>` is used to prove theorems.
Coq enters proof mode when you begin a proof,
such as with the :cmd:`Theorem` command.  It exits proof mode when
you complete a proof, such as with the :cmd:`Qed` command.  Tactics,
which are available only in proof mode, incrementally transform incomplete
proofs to eventually generate a complete proof.

When you run Coq interactively, such as through CoqIDE, Proof General or
coqtop, Coq shows the current proof state (the incomplete proof) as you
enter tactics.  This information isn't shown when you run Coq in batch
mode with `coqc`.

Proof State
-----------

The :gdef:`proof state` consists of one
or more unproven goals.

> Each goal has a :gdef:`conclusion` (the statement that is to be proven)
> and may have zero or more named facts that can be used in proving the
> conclusion.  The proof may also use facts from the :term:`global environment`
> such as definitions and proven theorems.

Reviewer: If the definition of "local context" is now elsewhere, this could be reformulated to something simpler like:

```suggestion
Each goal has a :gdef:`conclusion` (the statement that is to be proven)
and a :term:`local context`, which contains local :term:`variables <variable>` that can
be used in proving the conclusion.  The proof may also use :term:`constants <constant>`
from the :term:`global environment` such as definitions and proven theorems.
```

Author: Check what I wrote.  We don't have a glossary entry for `constant` or `variable` yet.  Not sure it's necessary or useful to define them since they are such pervasive concepts in math and CS.

Reviewer: It can wait. But variable is a pervasive concept both in math and CS indeed but with slightly differing meanings (CS variables being often mutable).

such as with the :cmd:`Theorem` command.  It exits proof mode when
you complete a proof, such as with the :cmd:`Qed` command.  Tactics,
which are available only in proof mode, incrementally transform incomplete
proofs to eventually generate a complete proof.

When you run Coq interactively, such as through CoqIDE, Proof General or
coqtop, Coq shows the current proof state (the incomplete proof) as you
enter tactics.  This information isn't shown when you run Coq in batch
mode with `coqc`.

Proof State
-----------

The :gdef:`proof state` consists of one
or more unproven goals.
Each goal has a :gdef:`conclusion` (the statement that is to be proven)
and may have zero or more named facts that can be used in proving the
conclusion.  The proof may also use facts from the :term:`local context`
and the :term:`global context`, such as definitions and proven theorems.

The term ":gdef:`goal`" may refer to an entire goal or to the conclusion
of a goal, depending on the context.

The conclusion appears below a line and the facts appear above the line.
The conclusion is a type and each fact has an associated type.
Facts can be :gdef:`hypotheses <hypothesis>`

> (which are propositions), variables or local definitions.

Reviewer: This is very minor but I'm thinking it might be better to change the `:gdef:` for a `:term:` at this point, remove the parenthesis, and introduce the `:gdef:` below where you write:
> "Variables" may refer (...) and "hypotheses" (...)

The name of the fact appears first.  The type is shown after the colon.  Local
definitions are shown in the form `n := 0 : nat`, for example, in which `nat` is the
type of `0`.

> The set of facts can be called the :gdef:`goal context`.  The :gdef:`local context`

Reviewer: I thought that you wanted to avoid defining "goal context" at all. I would have been fine with that.

Author: If we don't use `proof context` then I think we need a term like `goal context` which is more precise for tactics, which mostly work with one goal at a time.  Still 23 uses of `proof context` left to change to `goal context`--does that make sense.  I've looked at the terms a good bit and not always clear what to do.

Reviewer: Ah OK. It's possible though that most of these "proof context" could actually be changed in "local context". I guess it will be a case by case basis.

Author: Most of them are in SSR--I'll get those when I do the SSR chapter.  I fixed five more and left changes/history alone.

Author: Actually, `proof context` is useful for the Ltac/Ltac2 match goal construct, which examines multiple goals.  But only 2 uses.

   let tt_H := type of t_H in idtac "type of" t_H ":" tt_H.

A proof script, consisting of the tactics that are applied to prove a
theorem, is often informally referred to as a "proof".
The real proof, whether complete or incomplete, is a term, the :gdef:`proof term`,
which users may occasionally want to examine.  (This is based on the
*Curry-Howard isomorphism* :cite:`How80,Bar81,Gir89,H89`, which is
a correspondence between between proofs and terms and between
propositions and types of λ-calculus.  The isomorphism is also
sometimes called the "propositions-as-types correspondence")

The :cmd:`Show Proof` command displays the incomplete proof term
before you've completed the proof.  For example:

.. coqtop:: all

   Show Proof.

The incomplete parts, the goals, are represented by
:term:`existential variables <existential variable>`
with names that begin with `?Goal`.  The :cmd:`Show Existentials` command
shows each existential with the hypotheses and conclusion for the associated goal.

.. coqtop:: all

   Show Existentials.

Coq's kernel verifies the correctness of proof terms when it exits
proof mode by checking that the theorem statement is the same as the

> type of the proof term.

Reviewer: ...by checking that the proof term is well-typed and that its type is the same as the theorem statement.

Author: What's the definition of `well-typed`?  Is determining the type of an expression decidable?

Reviewer: > What's the definition of `well-typed`?

https://coq.inria.fr/refman/language/core/basic.html#term-well-typed

> Is determining the type of an expression decidable?

Type-inference in Coq is incomplete but that's not the role of the kernel. When a term reaches the kernel, it has sufficient type annotations (e.g. in binders) so that determining its type is decidable and straightforward.

Author: Got it.  If Coq tactics can't generate the right binding for a type annotation, can users explicitly provide the binding to work around that?  Is that approach used much?

Reviewer: Yes and yes. (Although I'm not used to using the word "binding" in this context: it's confusing because it looks like you are talking about binders.)

Author: Maybe I should have said "provide the annotation".  But your earlier comment says "has sufficient type annotations (e.g. in binders)"--that's not talking about binders??

Reviewer: Yep yep, sorry for being confusing too.

After a proof is completed, :cmd:`Print` `<theorem_name>`
shows the proof term and its type.  The type appears after
the colon (`forall ...`), as for this theorem from Coq's standard library:

.. coqtop:: all

>    Print proj1.

Author: Did you notice this in the output?  I haven't had a disk drive for years.  Maybe worth rephrasing as "from the file system" or "from files" in a separate PR?  I don't quite see why this message is worth having, either, BTW.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1253341/103105540-54f27280-45e3-11eb-85dc-66c739538cfc.png)

Reviewer: No, I had never noticed. Indeed, I agree that the message could be updated or even removed.

> 

Author: Reading all the chapter introductions (once they're all updated) may be a good way for someone to get an overview of Coq.  At that point we could add links at the end of each introduction section to take you to the next introduction section.

.. _proof-editing-mode:

Entering and exiting proof mode
-------------------------------

Coq enters :term:`proof mode` when you begin a proof through
commands such as :cmd:`Theorem` or :cmd:`Goal`.  Coq user interfaces
usually have a way to indicate that you're in proof mode.

Tactics are available only in proof mode (currently giving syntax
error outside of proof mode).  Most commands can be used both in and out of
proof mode, but some commands only work in proof mode.
By convention, tactics begin with lowercase letters

> while commands begin with uppercase letters.

Reviewer: Maybe add `:term:` for tactics and commands since they are defined elsewhere and maybe remove the last sentence since this information is already in the definition of these terms.

> proof mode, but some commands only work in proof mode.

Reviewer: and some only work outside.

.. todo PR: following seems to conflate the proof context with section-level info, e.g.
   Parameter, ... are part of the section  Is this truly the "local context"?

   To each goal is associated a number of hypotheses called the *local context*
   of the goal. Initially, the local context contains the local variables and
   hypotheses of the current section (see Section :ref:`gallina-assumptions`) and

>    the local variables and hypotheses of the theorem statement.

Reviewer: You can probably remove this now.

When the proof is completed, you can exit proof mode with commands such as
:cmd:`Qed`, :cmd:`Defined` and :cmd:`Save`.

.. cmd:: Goal @type

   Asserts an unnamed proposition.  This is intended for quick tests that
   a proposition is provable.  If the proof is eventually completed and
   validated, you can assign a name with the :cmd:`Save` or :cmd:`Defined`
   commands.  If no name is given, the name will be `Unnamed_thm` (or,
   if that name is already defined, a variant of that).

.. cmd:: Qed

>    Passes a completed proof term to Coq's kernel to verify that the type of
>    proof term matches the theorem statement.  If it's verified, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Passes a completed :term:`proof term` to Coq's kernel to verify that the type of
   the proof term matches the theorem statement.  If it's verified, the
```

or:
```suggestion
   Passes a completed :term:`proof term` to Coq's kernel to verify that its type
   matches the theorem statement.  If it's verified, the
```

   proof term is added to the global context as an opaque constant
   using the declared name from the original goal.

   It's very rare for a proof term to fail verification.  Generally this
   indicates a bug in Coq and/or a third party plugin used to

>    create the proof term.

Reviewer: I would rather say that "generally this indicates a bug in a tactic you used or that you misused some unsafe tactics".

 Proof handling

> -------------------

Author: I don't think that works.  Almost everything in the chapter can be used non-interactively.  How about just "Proofs"?

> -------------------

Reviewer: From https://coq.github.io/doc/master/refman/language/core/definitions.html#assertions-and-proofs:

>An assertion states a proposition (or a type) of which the proof (or an inhabitant of the type) is interactively built using tactics. The interactive proof mode is described in Chapter Proof handling

If you have a problem with "interactive" because it also works in batch mode (despite it still being an interactive process between a proof engine and tactics), we can remove the word "interactive" (although it is consistently used elsewhere) but it's important to keep "proof mode" IMHO.

> -------------------

Author: I'll make it "Proof mode" for now.  "interactive" seems appropriate for distinguishing between coqtop and coqc, for example, and perhaps in a few places to emphasize that Coq is primarily a proof assistant, not an automatic prover.

I think "proof editing mode" is also too wordy, it would be better just to say "proof mode".  It seems a stretch to consider it "editing" just because there are `Back`/`Undo` commands.

What do you think?  If agreeable, I will update uses of "interactive" and "proof editing mode".

> -------------------

Reviewer: Yes, I agree with your proposed change.

.. todo PR: my example is pretty bad--can you suggest a better one?

>    Also need to position/integrate this better

Reviewer: I'll think about it.

Proof State

> -----------

Author: I improved it a little.  I think that what's in `writing-proofs/index.rst` should be shortened considerably.  That file should be giving the road map for the chapter, but it doesn't even mention rewriting, SSReflect, detailed tactic examples or proof schemes--though perhaps those will be moved/heavily revised.

> -----------

Reviewer: I'd remove the second and third paragraph (whose content could be moved to this file). I've made an attempt in #13651.

> -----------

Author: I removed the 2 paragraphs and melded the important bits into the proof handling chapter.  Take a look at what I wrote.  Also check out my changes to the beginning of the tactics chapter.

Proof state consists of one or more subgoals that need to be proven.

> Each subgoal has a :gdef:`conclusion` (the statement that is to be proven)

Author: The wording in the output says we have subgoals rather than contexts, which sure look like they include hypotheses:

```
1 subgoal
  
  ============================
  forall n m : nat, n > m -> P 1 /\ P 2
```

"context" has 464 uses in the rsts, but I think it's for multiple meanings and it's such a generic word.  I think it's a poor choice to use all over the documentation, though in the code, we refer to the  "proof context" with a good bit of precision.

There are 122 occurrences of "conclusion" in the rsts, some of which (I didn't count them) are precisely as I use it, e.g. the first sentence of the tactics chapter: "A deduction rule is a link between some (unique) formula, that we call the *conclusion* and (several) formulas that we call the *premises*."  I think this reflects the terminology people use regularly--I think it's better not to be prescriptive with a single definition in this case.

I think it's not always possible or desirable to have a single meaning for a term (recent example: "equality").  We could just note that "conclusion" can refer to `B` in `A -> B`, as I noted the multiple meanings for `goal` in this subsection.  Again, I think it's following how people use the term.

WDYT?

> Each subgoal has a :gdef:`conclusion` (the statement that is to be proven)

Author: Also, I think there's not really a useful distinction between "goals" and subgoals", so I'd suggest we only use "goals".  AFAIK there is no superior/inferior relationship between goals.  What do you think?

> Each subgoal has a :gdef:`conclusion` (the statement that is to be proven)

Reviewer: OK, you are right that the current practice uses the term conclusion in this sense a lot (though to me the case of the intro of the tactics chapter is not a good example of this because it can be interpreted in both ways and my interpretation differs from yours).

About goals and subgoals, I agree with your suggestion. To me "subgoals" are "goals". The only place I would use "subgoals" is in the following kind of phrase "tactic X transforms the current goal into several subgoals".

> Each subgoal has a :gdef:`conclusion` (the statement that is to be proven)

Author: Who would be a good reviewer for https://github.com/coq/coq/pull/13656? Should I split it up to make it easier to review?

> Each subgoal has a :gdef:`conclusion` (the statement that is to be proven)

Reviewer: I think it is relatively easy to review. It's mostly a matter of making a choice so this PR could probably be raised in an upcoming Coq Call. If you mark the PR as ready to review, you can see if code owners react to it or not...

and may have zero or more :gdef:`hypotheses <hypothesis>`,
which are specific facts that can be used to proving the conclusion (in
addition to definitions, proven theorems, etc.).

Hypotheses appear above the line and the conclusion appears below the line.
Both of them are types.  Hypotheses have names, which appear before the colon
and may be referred to in the conclusion or other hypotheses.
Some hypotheses are akin to specifying the type of a variable, for example `n : nat`.

The term ":gdef:`goal`" may refer to an entire subgoal or to the conclusion
of a subgoal, depending on the context.

.. todo PR where does the term "hypothesis" come from?  It is not the
   common definition used in science.  Does it come from elsewhere or
   it Coq's invention to use it this way?  I could observe that it's

>    a misnomer

Reviewer: It's just the "hypothesis" from math as opposed to the rest of science (see the disambiguation on top of the Wikipedia page: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypothesis).

The proof state when you begin proving a theorem shows
the statement of the theorem below the line and no hypotheses above the
line:

.. coqtop:: none

   Parameter P: nat -> Prop.

.. coqtop:: out

   Goal forall n m: nat, n > m -> P 1 /\ P 2.

After applying a :term:`tactic` (shown below), we see hypotheses above the line.  The names of

> hypotheses (`n`, `m` and `H`) appear before a colon, followed by the type

Reviewer: Note that what we usually call "hypothesis" are only the "H" (i.e. the variables whose type is a proposition). The rest of them, we just call variables.

Author: How about this?  I think we can still consider variables to be hypotheses--its makes the definition here simpler (only "hypotheses above the line", not "hypotheses and variables above the line").

`Hypotheses that just associate a type with a name, such as `n : nat` are referred to as *variables*.`

Reviewer: The distinction is purely informal (irrelevant from the point of view of Coq) but it may still be counter-intuitive to use the same name for variables and hypotheses for mathematicians.

However, your proposal to define "variable" does not work since it applies to all hypotheses. `H` is just a name to which you associate a type (the statement of the hypothesis). The only thing in the context to which it wouldn't apply is local definitions (`n := 0 : nat`).

Author: In many places in the text we refer to "hypotheses".  Where the doc uses "hypotheses", do you think that already excludes variables and constants (so we don't have to review/revise all uses of "hypotheses"?

Do we need a term to refer to everything above the line?  I'd rather not have to list the possibilities wherever such a concept is needed.  Neither "facts" nor "above the line" would be good for general use.

I reworded this.  If you still don't like it perhaps you would suggest some wording?

> what we usually call "hypothesis" are only the "H" (i.e. the variables whose type is a proposition)

Meaning `Prop` or some other definition of "proposition"?  The former seems inconsistent with the behavior of the `type of` construct:

```
Goal forall n m : nat, n > m -> True.
intros.
let x := type of H in idtac x.          (* (n > m) *)
let y := type of (n > m) in idtac y.    (* Prop *)
```

Reviewer: >  Where the doc uses "hypotheses", do you think that already excludes variables and local definitions

Variables, no (or extremely rarely), because variables are just non-propositional hypotheses and hypotheses are propositional variables (we can choose whichever term we prefer as the "base" one). Local definitions, yes, they are often handled differently.

>Do we need a term to refer to everything above the line?

Doesn't the "proof context" term already encompasses this concept?

> Meaning `Prop` or some other definition of "proposition"?

Yes, "is a proposition" generally means "whose type is `Prop`" (or `SProp`): `H` is a hypothesis because its type `n > m` is a proposition because its type is `Prop`. Thus, it's expected that you need two `type of` to get to `Prop`. By contrast, `n` is a variable, because its type is `nat`, whose type is `Set`.

Author: Check what I wrote here and in the revised text in the tactics chapter.

> >Do we need a term to refer to everything above the line?

> Doesn't the "proof context" term already encompasses this concept?

I guess the items above the line should just be called "hypotheses".

I expect "context" would include both the hypotheses and the conclusion.  "proof context" has all goals; the entire proof state.  "goal context" has the hypotheses and conclusion for a single goal.  Does that make sense?

Reviewer: It seems to me that the standard definitions of a "foo context" are what is around foo but not foo itself. So "proof context" does not include the entire proof state in my opinion. We can also call it "hypotheses", but it would be less precise, because of the ambiguity with "propositional hypotheses".

Author: For "foo context", yes and no.  The point of using "context" is to highlight the relationship between "foo" and things it relates to.  The dictionary says "context" is: "the parts of something written or spoken that immediately precede and follow a word or passage and clarify its meaning" and that "in context" means "considered together with the surrounding words or circumstances."

"Goal context" makes sense (i.e. everything above the line).  "Proof context" doesn't seem as useful/sensible and I think we should drop it.  WDYT?

There are:
- 397 uses of "context" in the doc.  They would need to be reviewed individually to see what they refer to and whether some should be changed.  (Not going to do that in this PR.)
- 25 uses of "proof context", 16 of which are in SSR.  Most of the rest are in text I've previously updated.
- 6 uses of "goal context"
- 6 uses of "Contextual patterns" in SSR but it seems to be a different meaning of "context".  -Perhaps we can find a different term?
- 3 uses of "section context"  is used twice in SSR and one in `type-classes.rst`--maybe that term can be dropped.

Reviewer: >"Goal context" makes sense (i.e. everything above the line). "Proof context" doesn't seem as useful/sensible and I think we should drop it. WDYT?

Agreed.

type of `0`.

The set of facts can be called the :gdef:`goal context`.  The :gdef:`local context`
of a goal

> has local variables and hypotheses (see Section :ref:`gallina-assumptions`) defined

Reviewer: Maybe remove `Section` from here.

      even incur a memory overflow.

.. cmd:: Save @ident

>    Saves a completed proof with the name :token:`ident`, which

Reviewer: We should either indent `Save` to make it clear that it is a variant of `Qed` or be clearer in the description that it does the same thing as `Qed` except for the naming. E.g.:
```suggestion
   Similar to :cmd:`Qed`, except that the proof term is added to the global context with the name :token:`ident`, which
```

> .. opt:: Default Proof Mode @string

Reviewer: The documentation of this command might be worth moving up or at least to its own section (as opposed to a subsection of "Entering and exiting proof mode."

Reviewer: You resolved this without changing the location of the command nor the level of the section.

Author: Got it.  I don't even recall seeing the comment before.

Postponing the proof of some goals
``````````````````````````````````

Goals can be :gdef:`shelved` so they are no longer displayed in the proof state.

> They can then be :gdef:`unshelved`) to make them visible again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They can then be :gdef:`unshelved` to make them visible again.
```
